---
layout: post
title: The Dirtbag Mathematician
description: "We should always try to seek balance in life while keeping in mind that the perfect balance will always evade us. But finding that pefect balance is not the important part, it's the search that should inspire us."
categories: articles
date: 2014-02-17
image: 
        feature: skiier.jpg
published: true
---
Life is a balancing act in which there many different factors swaying us one way or another. Sometimes we're too motived and we forget to stop and small the roses as a result, while other times we struggle to conjure any motivation at all. We also face new inspiration, concepts, and interests on a daily basis, and getting everything to line up just right usually feels like a ligistical nighmare. We play a perpetual game of pushing the envelope in different areas of our life, testing to see what we can get away with here and there, in an effort to eventually find that sacred balance. But we're not going to find that perfect balance. In fact, the best part of this game is not the end, but its in the search where we should seek joy and inspiration.  

My balancing act usually consists of my lust for mathematical proof in one hand with an insatiable desire to ski, rock climb and live [the dirtbag lifestyle](http://dirtbagdiaries.com/) in the other.  Just to be clear, when I say "dirtbag", I am referring to a very specific defintion of the word, which is nicely summarized (and then elaborated upon) [here](http://climbinghouse.com/2012/03/dirtbag-explained.html). In an effort to reconcile these two life-consuming passions, I have learned things which I think anyone can apply to their own search for balance. Here I plan to share what I have learned from this quest so far.
	
A lot of it comes down to identity, oddly enough. During some of my most off-blance days, when I am inclined to become a world-renowned mathematician and forget everything else, my lifestyle and the way in which I perceive my own identity tends to change. When I shape my personal identity, it very much becomes tied to my mathematical persuits, meaning that I start to fulfill some of the stereotypes about mathematicians that I didn't associate with before. I become less capable in social settings and start acting way more nerdy than I actually I am because I get wrapped up in strong mathematical culture. In contrast, there are times when the balance swings to the other extreme and my primary concern is "seeking pow" or "skiing heaps", and my identity changes again. So I think during the search for this elusive balance, our identiy with depending on where we are pushing the enevelope, and it is important to just allow this transformation to take place instead of resisting it. As long as we don't start breaking the bank because our new identity requires new clothes or more than just the minimal gear required to pursue different passions, then having a fluid, ever-changing identity is not something to fight. It can actually be really fun to watch new identities unfold as your motivation tends towards different goals pertaining to different interests. 
	
In fact, when we fight this identity shift, we could be causing ourselves serious harm. As our lives progress, the amount of infrastructure that we have built around previously-seleceted passions tends to increase. We start to get to know a lot of people in a specific field, we get a job, we have a house - a lot of factors start to rely on our continued interest in passions that we have previously decided to base our life around. Then, as we discover new things, our fluid identity starts to shift around again. But the more infrastructure that we already have built, the more difficult is becomes to change things. In amount of energy required to persue different passions begins to seem insurmountable. 
	
Let's consider a mathematician as an example, who has now put in years of work to earn a Ph. D., and she now has several publications and several contacts in a specific area of mathematics. Maybe she has a car, a house, material itmes that depend on her continued interest and ability in mathematics. Then suppose our mathematicial gets bit by the skiing bug and suddenly realizes that what she really wants is to ski 200 days per year. Then it would take a lot to tear down the career that she has built for herself and continue to pay her bills on time. All of her friends know her as a mathematician, and she probably identifies a lot of her identity with her profession. At times like there, it seems easier for us to just keep our heads down and try to ignore these new interests and identity shifts. But the moment we make our identity and our lifestyle rigid and unchanging is the day that we embark on a road to severe unhappiness. When we set everything in stone, we risk losing the ability to keep an open mind to new things, and inevitably start to ignore the passion that was once burning bright within us.
	
Closing our mind off in this fashion can be a pretty slippery slope. The more rigid our life becomes, the more we ignore, and the more we ignore, the more we focus on our rigid lives, because we're shutting everything out just to keep this rigid lifestyle alive. New things come a long, things which previously may have lit a fiery passion within us to give it all up and explore something new. But the more we ignore things and close doors and stop smelling the roses, the more that fire dwindles, until what we feel when someone mentions the notion of living in a van and rock climbing every single day of the summer barely tickles our passion needle. 
	
So we go forward into our careers, and if we have any motivation left at all by this point, then we're seeking career success. We've built all of this infrastructure, and we've decided not to tear it down, so we might as well go forward as much as we can. Now, as humans, we all make mistakes. But when we start giving up everything else to pursue one thing, small mistakes start to seem like enormous blunders and we beat ourself up over them. 
	
For example, say I am in a phase where I am really inspired in a mathematics way. Then, on assignments or exams, I am bound to make the odd mistake, but since I tend to over-focus on math when I am in these phases, these mistakes feel like the end of the world because I have the thought that "this is all I've got" repeating over and over in the back of my mind. Then, a week or two later, when I hit the slopes, I make mistakes there, too. Since I only get to ski a couple of days in the year, I tumble most of the way down on at least a couple of the runs - but these are fun mistakes, because I haven't devoted everything to skiing at this point, and I am learning every step of the way. Here is where finding the perfect balance would come in. If I could somehow bring the laid back mentality that I have when I am skiing into my mathematics work, then it would be much more enjoyable. I would make mistakes, sure, but they wouldn't feel like the end of the world. I would be empowered to tumble all the way down that figurative mathematics mountain, figure out where I went wrong, and get myself right back on the chair lift to try again. 
	
An important point here is that even dirtbags, who are supposed be living the life, can fall into this over-focus trap. There are a lot of great skiiers and rock climbers out there, practicing every day that the weather permits, and its a tricky thing to avoid getting caught up in the competition. Even these guys can start to think of tiny falls as the end of the world, and this thinking should be a sign that we have shut our minds off and need some cross training. 
	
Now, people live out different balancing acts every day, each with their own unique challenges. Balancing mathematics with adventure sports is special because both of these passions seem to consume the lives of those who persue them. Anyone with with an itch to dabble in either of these should beware - one does not simply dabble in mathematics or adventure sports. The pleasure that I get out of these things is exponentially correlated to the amount of work and effort that I sink into them. This kind of creates in a vicious cycle in which you put in work, and get out insane amount of joy in return. What I'm describing is beginning to sound a bit like a drug, and I think there's are some climbers, skiiers, or mathematicians who might agree with the description. So if just one of these things can consume the entire life of one persion, imagine if the ratio were to change. Imagine you had to mange two of these. One moment I think that I want to be the world's leading expert in algebraic geometry, while the next I'm planning to buy a van, sublet my apartment and head for the mountains. I am pretty much expecting to wake up one day and find myself trying publish rigorous mathematical proofs in academic journals from a van in Yosemite - sounds like an unlikely pursuit.
	
Reconcling these two passions seems seems like an impossible task, but I have some faith that it can be done. , mostly because people have done it in the past. Enter John Gill, Michael Freedman and Jean-Pierre Serre. John Gill, on top of publishing around thirty papers and starting a minor research journal in the analytic theory of continued fractions, somehow found the time to earn the title ``The Father of Modern Bouldering''. Michael Freedman is known both for his work on the famous Pioncar\'e Conjecture and for helping to develop the climbing scene around San Diego. Jean-Pierre Serre managed to squeeze in frequent bouldering sessions at Fontainebleau somewhere in between his work on algebraic topology and commutative algebra. These guys are all brilliant mathematicians who seem to have found a way to persue both mathematics and the climbing lifestyle to their fullest. If they can do it, then I'm confident that I can too
	
In conclusion, we all need balance in our lives. We should always set aside time to open the door to new interests in a way that allows us to discover, or rediscover, our passion, even if we think we have already found it. Searching for that balance is maybe one of the most enjoyable games in life, poking and prodding at different aspects of it, accepting new things, getting rid of old things, and having a very fluid, ever-changing identity. Simply put, the emphasis should be on the journey, not the goal or the finish line. So the next time someone asks you if you've found your passion, the response should be, "I certainly hope not, because that would mean that I've stopped looking."


*[Photo](http://www.flickr.com/photos/newdimensionfilms/5370053977/in/photolist-9bwVXx-9bwMMp-9bA12j-9bzYYA-9bA1cY-9bzVfL-9bwMqz-9bA4Ww-9bzZso-9bwVxB-9bzT7L-8wsfi3-bnBX4C-9xdAK2-7xAsdT-7xAr92-7xEhEE-9xzraM-9xgAJS-9xgB3U-9xgBf3-9xgBph-9xdAXZ-7xAqLg-7xAsVr-7xEfVh-7xArF4-7xEfrG-7xEgpu-7xAsre-7TLj79-7TH3GR-7TLmSb-7TLmej-7TLkAC-7TLjNw-9oZH2j-9oWDAV-9oZMCW-9oWD8v-9oWsxP-9oZKQu-9oZRqL-9oWvFp-9oZEKW-9oWGKM-9oZCV7-9oZGsL-9oWLqr-9oZNEw-9oZyym/) by [John Lemieux](http://www.flickr.com/people/newdimensionfilms/) / [CC BY](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)*


