---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Mathematics from the Slopes
description: "The beauty lies in the journey to finding that elusive balance."
categories: articles
date: 2014-02-17
image: 
        feature: skiier.jpg
published: true
---
Life is a bit of a balancing act. There will always be many different influences swaying us one way or another. Sometimes our motivation is a little too much, other times it's not quite enough. We also face new inspiration, concepts, and interests on a daily basis, and getting all of these things to line up just right usually seems like a logistical nightmare. As a result, we play a perpetual game of pushing the envelope in different areas of our lives, testing to see what we can get away with here and there, in an effort to eventually find that sacred balance. But we're never going to find that perfect balance. In fact, it's not the balance in the end that brings us joy and fulfillment, but the journey along the way.  

My own balancing act usually involves my lust for mathematical rigour in one hand with an insatiable desire to ski, rock climb and [live the dirtbag lifestyle](http://climbinghouse.com/2012/03/dirtbag-explained.html) in the other, each interest vying for all of my time and attention. In an effort to reconcile these two life-consuming passions, I have learned things which I think anyone can apply to their own search for balance. Here I plan to share what I have learned from this quest so far.
	
A lot of it comes down to identity, oddly enough. Some days, the the balance has shifted way in favour of mathematics and suddenly I am inclined to become a world-renowned mathematician and forget everything else in the world. During these times, my lifestyle and the way in which I perceive my own identity tends to change. When I shape an image of myself in my mind, it becomes closely tied to my mathematical pursuits, meaning that I start to fulfill some of the stereotypes about mathematicians that I didn't associate with before. I become less capable in social settings and start acting way more nerdy than I actually am because I get wrapped up in the strong mathematical culture that exists in most university math departments. 

###Sample Section Heading

In contrast, there are times when the balance swings to the other extreme and I start to believe that I live only to "seek pow" and "ski heaps", and my identity changes again. I think that during the search for this elusive balance, our identity will change depending on where we decide to push the envelope, and it is important to just allow this transformation to take place instead of resisting it. As long as we don't start breaking the bank because our new identity requires new clothes or more than just the minimal gear required to pursue different passions, then having a fluid, ever-changing identity is not something to fight. It can actually be really fun to watch new identities unfold as our motivation tends towards different goals pertaining to different interests. 
	
In fact, when we fight this identity shift, we are causing ourselves serious harm. As our lives progress, the amount of infrastructure that we have built around previously selected passions tends to increase. Then, as we discover new things, our fluid identity starts to shift around again. But the more infrastructure that we already have built, the more difficult it becomes to change things. The amount of energy required to pursue different interests begins to seem insurmountable. 
	
Consider your friendly neighbourhood mathematician as an example. At this point in her life, she has now put in years of work to earn a Ph.D. and now has several publications and several contacts in a specific area of mathematics. Maybe she has a car, a house, material items that depend on her sustained interest and ability in mathematics. Then suppose our mathematician gets bit by the skiing bug and suddenly realizes that all she ever really wanted was to ski 100 days out of the year and then go rock climbing the other 265. Then it would take a lot to tear down the career that she has built for herself and continue to pay her bills on time. All of her friends know her as a mathematician, and she probably associates a lot of her identity with the way in which she currently spends the majority of her time. 

At times like these, it usually seems easier for us to just keep our heads down and try to ignore these new interests and potential identity shifts so that we can keep on the straight and narrow. But the moment we make our identity and our lifestyle rigid and unchanging is the day that we embark on the road to severe unhappiness. When we set everything in stone, we risk losing the ability to keep an open mind to new things, and inevitably start to ignore the passion that was once burning bright within us.
	
Closing our mind off in this fashion can be a pretty slippery slope. The more rigid our life becomes, the more we ignore. The more we ignore, the more we focus on our rigid life. We start shutting everything out just to keep our current lifestyle alive. New things come along, things which may have previously lit a fiery desire to give it all up and explore something new. But the more we ignore things and close doors and stop smelling the roses, the more that fire dwindles, until what we feel when someone mentions the notion of living in a van and rock climbing every single day of the summer barely tickles our passion needle. 
	
So we go forward with these rigid lives, and if we have any motivation left at all by this point, then we're sinking it into that rigid life. We've built all of this infrastructure, and we've decided not to tear it down, so we might as well go forward as much as we can. Now, as humans, we all make mistakes. But when we start giving everything else up in order to pursue one thing, small mistakes start to seem like enormous blunders. We start beating ourselves up over things that are mere learning experiences.
	
As another example, suppose I am in a phase where I am really inspired in a mathematical way. Then, on assignments or exams, I am bound to make the odd mistake, but since I tend shut everything else out during these phases, these mistakes feel like the end of the world because I have the thought that "this is all I've got" repeating over and over in the back of my mind. Then, a week or two later, when I hit the slopes, I make mistakes there, too. Since I only get to ski a couple of days in the year, I tumble most of the way down on at least a couple of runs - but these are fun mistakes, because I haven't devoted everything to skiing at this point, and I am learning every step of the way. Here is where finding the perfect balance would come in. If I could somehow bring the laid-back mentality that I have when I am skiing into my mathematics work, then doing mathematics would be much more enjoyable. I would still make mistakes, sure, but they wouldn't feel like the end of the world. I would be empowered to tumble all the way down that figurative mathematics mountain, figure out where I went wrong, and get myself right back on the chair lift to try again. 
	
An important point here is that even ski bums, who are supposed be living the life, can fall into this over-focus trap. There are a lot of great skiers and rock climbers out there, practicing every possible day, and it's a tricky thing to avoid getting caught up in the competition. Even these guys can start to think of tiny falls as the end of the world, and this thinking should be a sign that we have shut our minds off and become too rigid, a sign that we need to do some cross training. 
	
Now, any given person probably lives out a different balancing act than everyone else, each one with their own unique challenges. Balancing mathematics with adventure sports is special because both of these endeavours seem to consume the lives of those who pursue them. Anyone with with an itch to dabble in either of these should beware - one does not simply dabble in mathematics or adventure sports. The pleasure that I get out of these things is exponentially correlated to the amount of time and effort that I sink into them. This kind of creates a vicious cycle which feeds off of my work and attention, and spits out insane amounts of joy in return. What I'm describing is beginning to sound a bit like a drug, and I think there are some climbers, skiers, or mathematicians who might agree with that description. Having two such interests seems to put me into a perpetual cycle, alternating between working at being the world's leading expert in algebraic geometry and planning to buy a van, sublet my apartment and head for the mountains. This sounds like a pretty unsustainable lifestyle, and it seems like something has got to give. But in the end, it all comes back to balance. 
	
Although it sounds romantic, I'm pretty sure that that balance is not a life of trying publish rigorous mathematical proofs in academic journals from the back of a van in Yosemite. However, thanks to a few of my role models, I do have faith that there is some kind of balance that I can work towards. Enter John Gill, Michael Freedman and Jean-Pierre Serre. John Gill, on top of publishing around thirty papers and starting a minor research journal in the analytic theory of continued fractions, somehow found the time to earn the title "The Father of Modern Bouldering". Michael Freedman is known both for his work on the famous Pioncaré Conjecture and for helping to develop the climbing scene in and around San Diego. Jean-Pierre Serre managed to squeeze in frequent bouldering sessions at Fontainebleau somewhere in between his work on algebraic topology and commutative algebra. These guys are all brilliant mathematicians who seem to have found a way to pursue both mathematics and the climbing lifestyle to the fullest. If they can do it, then I'm confident that we can all find a way to pursue all of our passions and work towards some kind of balance as well.
	
In conclusion, we should always try set aside time to open the door to new interests in a way that allows us to discover - or rediscover - our passion, even if we think we have already found it. Searching for that balance is maybe one of the most enjoyable games in life, poking and prodding at different aspects of it, accepting new things, getting rid of old things, and having a very fluid, ever-changing identity. Simply put, the emphasis should be on the journey, not the goal or the finish line. So the next time someone asks you if you've found your passion, maybe the response should be, "I certainly hope not, because that would mean that I've stopped looking."


*[Photo](http://www.flickr.com/photos/newdimensionfilms/5370053977/in/photolist-9bwVXx-9bwMMp-9bA12j-9bzYYA-9bA1cY-9bzVfL-9bwMqz-9bA4Ww-9bzZso-9bwVxB-9bzT7L-8wsfi3-bnBX4C-9xdAK2-7xAsdT-7xAr92-7xEhEE-9xzraM-9xgAJS-9xgB3U-9xgBf3-9xgBph-9xdAXZ-7xAqLg-7xAsVr-7xEfVh-7xArF4-7xEfrG-7xEgpu-7xAsre-7TLj79-7TH3GR-7TLmSb-7TLmej-7TLkAC-7TLjNw-9oZH2j-9oWDAV-9oZMCW-9oWD8v-9oWsxP-9oZKQu-9oZRqL-9oWvFp-9oZEKW-9oWGKM-9oZCV7-9oZGsL-9oWLqr-9oZNEw-9oZyym/) by [John Lemieux](http://www.flickr.com/people/newdimensionfilms/) / [CC BY](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)*


