---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Cool Your Jets
description: Sometimes we all just need a friendly reminder to chill out. 
categories: articles
date: 2014-02-17
image: 
        feature: 
published: false
---
*ROUGH DRAFT*

Being a resident of a major Canadian city, facing the daily winds and cold while walking around the city tends to wear down on my patience so slowly that I almost don't notice it. Instead of strolling along the side walk at a steady pace in the sunshine, it is usually more of an awkward walk/run thing, hands stuffed in my pockets, shoulders shrugged up to my ears in an effort to battle the face-blistering winds - I'm sure it looks absolutely ridiculous. 

Having lived through many such Canadian winters, I have built up a sort of mental toughness that helps me deal with the fact that I don't have the luxury of living in California during the cold months of the year. However, recently, on my way to school, I found myself at the edge of my patience. In the moments where I could feel my blood boiling and my focus slipping, the wind gave one last strong gust, and just as I was about to give in to frustration, I caught a glimpse of a madman riding his bike in the howling arctic winds, and this madman was _singing_. 

{::comment}
, and It's just about March, we've had a couple of tantalizingly warm days in February so far, and the fact that it still gets this cold seems unfair. I almost became extremely frustrated by allowing my meditation/focus to slip and let the negative thoughts flow. But then I saw something which made me catch myself just before allowing this to happen. I saw a cyclist riding down the street in this god-awful weather during rush hour, and this madman was _singing_. 
{:/comment}

Now, I've commuted by bicycle through a couple of Montreal winters so far, so I know from experience that it can be rough. Usually a lot of warm clothing is required to make it bearable, but it is likely that most people who commute by bicycle in the winter are at least partially motivated by financial reasons. Needless to say, the majority of commuting cyclists are probably not decked out in full Arc Teryx ski kit for their daily commute. On the contrary, they're definitely freezing their buns off. 

{::comment}
more than you need for just strolling around the streets. The roads and, as a result of the spray from the road, all of your clothes are covered in salt and dirt. You pretty much need a full wardrobe at the office/school to put on and change out of. And the winds - Montreal is not known as a particularly windy city, but when its -20 out, pretty much any wind is your worst enemy. You also have to maintain your bike and stuff. But chances are, most people commuting by bicycle in the middle of winter are doing so because they don't have a car, live too far away, and can't afford public transportation, which means you're probably not decked out in a fully insulated Arc Teryx ski kit. On the contrary, you're definitely freezing your buns off. 
{:/comment}

So watching this cyclist nonchalantly pass by - riding through rush hour traffic, dodging potholes and ice patches, battling ferocious winds and frigid temperatures all the while - reminded me that it wasn't actually that cold. Sure, compared to California, our winters are brutal. But I was well dressed and was definitely not battling the winds that the cyclist was facing. In fact, at that moment, I tricked myself into thinking is was almost _balmy_. I let my shoulders relax, put on some music, and actually enjoyed the rest walk to school in the fresh winter air. The dark mood that winter tried to cast upon my day had been lifted. 

And remember that this just came about as the result of one little trigger - a singing cyclist. He was in my view for a maximum of five seconds, and I soon forgot about him. But that little trigger was all I needed to take myself from the edge of my patience and into a happier state of mind. 

I'm sure I'm not the only one with triggers like this. In fact, I'm sure we all have different ones, and we draw on our previous life experiences to create them. For me, a cyclist singing in this weather made an especially large impact because I've _been_ that cyclist, and I know how cold it can on a bicycle in the winter. So if this cyclist was able to relax, then I could definitely do the same.

As an athlete, I was actually _taught_ to use this technique in my mental game all the time. When I found myself on the losing side of a game, I could recognize potential mental pitfalls in that situation, go to the thoughts which I already knew would trigger positive emotions, and then be able to focus on my game instead of thinking about how bad I was playing or what would happen if I didn't succeed. 

Ideally, with enough practice we would like to have these triggers come from within. Instead of relying on the chance that something externally might trigger a shift in our moods, wouldn't it be nice to be able to recognize thoughts that keep us calm and be able to come back to them in times of stress? This technique does not need to be reserved for athletes. It can be used by all of us in our daily lives - its just a matter of finding our mental trigger.  
