---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Thought Trigger
description: We can train our brains to keep things positive, even when we're pushed to our limits. 
categories: articles
date: 2014-02-28
image: 
        feature: winterBike.jpg
published: true
---
Walking around Montreal, the freezing Canadian city that I call home, and facing harsh winter weather on a daily basis tends to wear down on my patience over the course of our long winter. Instead of steadily strolling through the city to go about my business, my gait is usually more of an awkward walk/run thing, hands stuffed in my pockets, shoulders shrugged up to my ears in an effort to battle the face-blistering winds - I'm sure it looks absolutely ridiculous. 

Having lived through many such Canadian winters, I have built up a sort of mental toughness that helps me deal with this kind of weather. However, the other day on my way to school, I found myself approaching my patience threshold. My focus slipped, my blood started to boil, and just as I was about to give in to my frustration about the weather, I caught a glimpse of a madman riding his bike in the howling arctic winds, and he was _singing_. 

Now, I've commuted by bicycle through a couple of Montreal winters, so I know from experience that it can be a daily mental battle. Its a constant wrestling match with the snow, ice, wind and motorosts, and more often than not, this takes place well after the sun has gone down. The only way to make all of this bearable is to invest in a wardrobe of quality winter clothing, but the majority of commuting cyclists are probably not decked out in full Arc'teryx ski kit for their daily commute. In fact, the *reason* that they’re commuting by bicycle is because they can’t afford such things. Needless to say, bicycle commuters are definitely freezing their buns off all winter long. 

So watching this cyclist nonchalantly pass by - riding through rush hour traffic, dodging potholes and ice patches, battling ferocious winds and frigid temperatures all the while - reminded me that it wasn't actually *that* bad walking through the cold on the sidewalk. Sure, our winters are brutal. But I was warmly dressed and definitely wasn't battling the obstacles that the cyclist was facing. In fact, at that moment, I tricked myself into thinking is was almost balmy. I let my shoulders relax, put on some music, and enjoyed the rest of the walk to school in the fresh winter air. The dark mood that winter tried to cast upon my day had been lifted. 

And remember that this just came about as the result of one little trigger - a singing cyclist. He was in my view for a maximum of five seconds, and I soon forgot about him. But that little trigger was all I needed to take myself from the edge of my patience to a happier state of mind. 

I'm sure I'm not the only one with a thought trigger like this one. In fact, I'm sure we all have many different ones, drawing on our previous life experiences to create them. For me, a cyclist singing in this weather made an especially large impact because I've *been* that cyclist, and I know how cold the experience can be. So if he was able to relax, then I was definitely capable of doing the same. 

With enough practice, we can start to have these triggers come from within. Instead of relying on the chance that something externally might intitiate a shift in our moods, wouldn't it be nice to be able to recognize thoughts that make us calm and be able to come back to them in times of stress? I’m sure our dramatically carefree cyclist was making use of this technique with his own thought triggers, consciously or not, but he shouldn’t be the only one. This technique can be used by all of us to stay positive during the mental challanges that we face on a daily basis - it’s just a matter of experimenting and discovering which unique triggers keep us focused on positive thoughts. 

*[Photo](http://www.flickr.com/photos/fiatluxe/98749087/sizes/o/in/photostream/) by [fiat luxe](http://www.flickr.com/photos/fiatluxe/) / [CC BY](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/2.0/)*

