---
layout: post-light-feature
title: It's Not About the Gear
description: "Remembering the influence that inspired us to head to the coast, crag, or backcountry piste in the first place."
categories: articles
date: 2014-04-16
image: 
        feature: gear.jpg
        thumb: gearthumb.png
published: true
---
Due to the way I was raised, there has always been a slight hint of anti-consumerism in my personal philosophy. Throughout my childhood, my parents, a couple of hippies in disguise, used to return from their ordinary jobs at the hospital or at the office and head straight for the garden or the wood shop. We lived across the street from a park with a big ravine where my older brother Eric and I used to read books, play cops and robbers, or swing on rope swings into the river. In 6th grade, Eric handed down his copy of The Hobbit to me, followed by his copy of Walden two years later. Between the usual onslaught of sports practices and exploring in the ravine with the likes of Thoreau and Tolkien, there was little need for more than what we had mere steps from our front door. From this standpoint, it would seem that I was well on my way to extricating consumerism from my world and living a fulfilled life spent mostly in the wilderness.

And yet, here I sit, a decade after my first encounter with Thoreau, on the verge of starting my first well-paid, career-path job, counting the money that I will earn this summer well before it has entered my bank account. Recently I've spent too much time perusing gear websites, dreaming of how well-equipped I will be for the next powder session or trip to the crag. In general, I am overwhelmed by the severity to which consumerism has seeped back into my life, even though my bond with nature is stronger than ever. So what has happened to the young disciple of Thoreau that I once was?

I can honestly say that this change in mindset only set in some time in the last couple of years or so. From that romantic, Tom Sawyer-esque childhood, I was forced to move on and tackle high school. But it was there that the hint of anti-consumerism in my philosophy was allowed to blossom and became my entire purpose. I used to spend the long, Canadian winters dreaming of paddling down the Concord and Merimack rivers, and planning canoe trips in between sports practices and mundane high school homework. In tenth grade, to my well-to-do classmates at the boarding school that I was then attending, I delivered a speech about the happiness of denouncing material possessions, moving to the woods and "sucking out all the marrow of life". I was determined to preach anti-consumerism from the mountain tops, all the while being careful not to fall into the pit of cliché high school rebellion.

Since arriving at post-secondary school, I have had the privilege and the freedom to pursue just about anything imaginable as long as the school work continues to get done. In this vein, I have sunk my teeth into rock climbing, skiing, paddling, cycling, ultrarunning, hiking and just about any other outdoor sport you can imagine. I have wholly embraced all that is "outdoor adventure" including the different social cultures that come along with it.

Outdoor adventures like these have always been appealing to me. It seems only natural, what with my upbringing and influence from Thoreau, that I should find nothing but pure joy in such activities. Nothing brings me more pleasure than taking off on a Friday evening and leaving behind everything besides my tent, the climbing gear and a bit of grub. But what I didn't realize until just recently is that, along with this fiery passion for outdoor adventure and "leaving it all behind", came an obsession with gear, and it snuck in the back door without my noticing.

What has happened is that a few business-minded people have recognized that there are a lot of people who may have had a similar upbringing to mine, or at least arrived at the same nature-loving philosophy inspired by Thoreau, Muir, or Emerson that I have. And rather than celebrating the fact that people are starting to find ways to live with less, some people see it as a financial opportunity to make a profit. So what we end up with are extremely well-designed, modern websites and sales floors with a slightly rustic appeal, featuring gear, or even just average clothing, that they claim is designed for "your next trip to the woods". So people end up with a bunch of this stuff that will eventually go out of style and they will move on and buy different things, thus defeating the whole purpose of buying a well-made, expensive product intended to last a long time. In the end, the feature "long-lasting" is trumped by the planned obsolescence that suddenly becomes a factor when your ski jacket becomes a fashion statement. 

In fact, the business of selling the outdoor lifestyle has become so extreme that we’re starting to see products from brands such as Patagonia or The North Face on display alongside garments from more brand-oriented street style items such as a pair of Vans or Levis. That’s not to say that I don’t want such wide-spread success for said brands, but it is disappointing to watch items which are designed to perform in the toughest conditions that nature can throw at us (and priced accordingly) plummet into the world of fashion where form usually prevails over function. In my opinion, the world of fashion/consumerism and the world of nature exploration/outdoor adventures should never marry - there is simply no way to reconcile such a stark disagreement in philosophy between these two types of manufacturers. In my mind, when the two are mixed, you end up with companies trying to sell the “outdoorsy” image via low-quality garments which are suitable for neither the ski slopes nor the runway. 

That’s not to say that outdoor gear shouldn’t match with a pair of Vans shoes or with a dapper pair of jeans. In fact, this notion excites me because it means I can finally wear my ski coat as my winter coat around the city and I’ll actually be on-trend! But it is important to keep ourselves in check and be honest with ourselves when drawing that line between what we need for outdoor adventure and what is superfluous but well-designed and aesthetically-pleasing. This is obviously easier said than done and it is becoming more and more difficult to be completely honest with ourselves because outdoor gear is so damn sexy these days. In order to keep ourselves in check, we need to recall the real reason that brought us to take take to the woods in the first place. For some of us, it was about simplicity and getting away from the toils of modern society. But certainly for all of us it’s about testing our limits as human beings and experimenting with how little we can do without. If we keep this in mind, and remember that the nature will only continue to be there for us if our gear is manufactured in a way which gives as much back to the environment as we take, then we should be able to find that fine line between products which support our outdoor expeditions and those which begin to spoil them. 

*[Photo](http://www.flickr.com/photos/chrigu/3828941773/#) by [Christian Cueni](https://www.flickr.com/photos/chrigu/) / [CC BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/)*

