---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Peakbagging in the Gulf Marshes
description: "Recounting just a handful of the crazy things that I have done for a taste of the mountains."
categories: articles
date: 2014-08-02
image: 
        feature: suunto.jpg
        thumb: suuntothumb.png
published: true
---

Anyone who has met me in the last five years would probably describe me as a mountain person born on the wrong coast. I was first bitten by the mountain bug in high school, somewhere between my trips to Southern California and British Columbia, and I’ve been chasing those jagged mountain-silhouetted horizons ever since. This is not an easy thing to do from a home base in Montreal, where we in the world of peak bagging talk about four-thousand footers rather than those monstrous 14ers of Colorado. 

So when I learned that I would be working a four-month internship in Texas, I was ecstatic about the potential for outdoor mountain adventures. I’ve mingled in the Montreal climbing community enough to know that Texas is the home of the famous Hueco Tanks. Also, the Ansel Adams fan that I am, the thought of stepping between the towering walls of Santa Elena Canyon in Big Bend National Park caused a nagging feeling in my gut that I soon realized wouldn’t let me rest until I allowed these thoughts to become actions. It wasn’t until I caught a glimpse of my new home for the summer (the city of Houston) from the airplane above that I considered the vastness of the lone star state. Searching the horizon for the ancient, pink limestone of the Guadalupe Mountains, I saw nothing but grass and long, dry rivers meandering across the flat plains. I later confirmed that Texas is actually larger than the entire nation of France, and that I would be spending my summer 1013 km (630 miles) from Big Bend NP.  
 
Since the night of my arrival, I’ve spent my weekends driving around the area, looking for little seldom-discovered pockets resembling the mountain-seekers’s paradise that I craved. I tried heading south toward the Gulf coast, where we found mostly rubbish-covered beaches and hurricane destruction. Heading north, I was confronted head-on with the reality of the economic crisis when I met a homeless family living in the flat, humid swamps of Sam Houston National Forest. Still unsatisfied, I headed West toward the Hill Country, my expectations severely lowered by this point, in what I thought would be my last attempt at finding something at least resembling the small hills around Montreal with which I have become so familiar. We camped at Pace Bend Park and Enchanted Rock State Natural Area, both of which presented us with a hot, dry climate in the middle of a serious drought period and got us to a maximum elevation of 556 m (1825 ft) at the top of Enchanted Rock. For a third time, I found myself facing another week of the 9 to 5 still with that nagging feeling nudging me in every idle moment to go running in the mountains. 

I spent the following two weeks regrouping. By this point I had exhausted all of the easy options and it was time to double my efforts. I poured over maps, made meticulous gas milage calculations and asked myself over and over the question “exactly how crazy for mountains am I?” The answer? Completely bonkers. At the end of those two weeks, my climbing buddy and I had packed our bags, finalized our trajectory and started driving west on I-10 with Guadalupe Mountains National Park set in our crosshairs. The plan was to drive through the night and summit Guadalupe Peak for sunrise on Saturday. We would then head north towards Santa Fe with the intent of summiting Santa Fe Baldy in the Pecos Wilderness Area, the fifth tallest peak in New Mexico, before returning to Houston on Sunday. It would be a round trip of 3035 kilometres (1886 miles) and we had to do it all before we were expected back at the office at 8 AM on Monday.   

Now, I wouldn’t call myself the most experienced road tripper. I’ve driven around Ontario, Quebec and the north-eastern states for various sport climbing trips. But no trip could have prepared me for what I would experience driving across southern Texas in the middle of the night. Until that night, I didn’t think it was easy to get away from cell phone service in this country, but we began to lose contact with the rest of the world not more than 100 miles outside of San Antonio. I also didn’t think it was possible to drive for 200 miles without seeing a single gas station, but civilization gradually became more and more sparse until eventually we started driving 50 to 100 mile sections without even seeing another car, let alone a gas station. 

Originally I had planned to make this a solo trip, but at 2 AM, when the fuel gauge dipped blow the quarter-tank marker and I hadn’t had cell phone service for the last hour, I was glad that my climbing buddy was there. In the end, we didn’t run out of gas and we didn’t get mugged by the crazy highway bandits that my wild imagination began to create in my mind. However, we were extremely vulnerable in a way that I had never felt before. When we venture into the wilderness, we experience a specific kind of vulnerability. We are at risk of wild animal encounters, debilitating injuries and inclement weather. But I would not say that I’ve ever feared my fellow human while in the wildness. In contract, on an unfamiliar highway in the middle of the night, two unarmed, kind-hearted people are pretty much left at the mercy of anyone who happens to come along should they have to stop due car trouble or fatigue. It was a truly isolating and nerve-racking experience for me - but I’m happy it happened, because it was all in the spirit of the adventure. 

After several tanks of gas and 9 hours of driving, we arrived at Guadalupe Mountains NP, free of the swampy world of East Texas, the shadows of Guadalupe Peak and El Capitan (not the real El Cap) barely visible in the 4 AM moonlight. After a small breakfast and a quick check of the route to the top, we switched on our headlamps and started up the narrow switchbacks. At 2667 m (8750 feet), Guadalupe peak is not the tallest peak in world to summit. That being said, it was still double the elevation of the tallest peak that either of us had ever summited. We ascended the first few trail miles quickly and without much effort. But after a couple of hours on the trail, as the sun began to illuminate the pink limestone cliffs of the Guadalupe mountains, we started imagining that each little high point of the trail was nearer to the summit than it was in reality. Around each bend, we naively told ourselves that the summit was only a couple more switchbacks away. In general, due to our lack of experience, we severely underestimated how long and difficult the hike would be. After about an hour of this wishful thinking, the summit marker finally came into view. As we rounded the last bend, light cloud cover rolled into the valley below us, and instead of setting over top of the surrounding peaks, the sun rose up over the clouds, casting a brilliant pink light on the landscape around us. With the notion of the humid, blistering hot swamps of Houston in the back of our minds, we took in the view and enjoyed the chilly breeze, wondering how we would ever go back to our normal 9 to 5 lives. That view alone would stick in the back my mind for several weeks to come, but at that moment, it was enough to inspire our tired bodies and minds to descend as quickly and safely as possible and make our way to even taller peaks that awaited us in Santa Fe. 

After running down the mountain, we tried to rest our tired minds with a quick nap, but it seems that once the body starts operating on adrenaline after a sleepless night, it’s hard to shut things down and relax. Shortly after 11 AM, we gave up on sleep and drove north for more mountains. Other than passing through small towns such as Roswell and Carlsbad, the entirety of the drive was spent marvelling at the barren, desert landscape and after crossing HWY 40 just east of Albuquerque, we started to rise up into the mountains and we were in downtown Santa Fe before we knew it.  As we rose higher and higher up into the wilderness, and finally reached an elevation of 3352 metres (11 000 ft) at our campsite, the temperature had dropped to a refreshing 71 degrees Fahrenheit. Too exhausted to make dinner or even light a campfire, we crawled into our sleeping bags as soon as the tents were up and fell asleep before sunset among the flickering, glistening Aspens. 

The next morning we were greeted with even more beautiful weather - a refreshing 51 degrees Fahrenheit in the sun - but we mutually agreed that the run to the top of Santa Fe Baldy plus the 12 hour drive back to Houston was beginning to sound a bit unrealistic. Instead, we stopped at REI in Santa Fe where I picked up a topo map of the mountains in the region with the hopes that I would be able to return soon to bag some real peaks. 

Heading east from Santa Fe, I watched the the mountains disappear in my rear view mirror. I tried hard to memorize the view so I would be able to see it vividly in my mind when we returned to the marshes of Houston. As it turns out, I did a pretty good job of it because that image and the thought of future trips prevented me from sleeping soundly for the entire following week. Instead of sleeping, I poured over maps and tried to ease the intense feeling of wanderlust by watching some of my favourite episodes of Salomon Running TV, but it was no use. Instead, I used the map that I had bought to plan some future trips to tuck away for when I have the chance to head back in that direction. 

Going forward, I’m turning my focus toward the White Mountains of New Hampshire. Only a four hour drive from Montreal, these mountains are home to the famous Presidential Traverse which passes such peaks as Mt. Washington and Mt. Adams. I plan on spending many weekends there this fall, where my main goal will not be to maximize trail miles, but to maximize vertical ascents, in an effort to train my body for a time when I have the freedom to return to the West and tackle some 14ers in the Rockies. 
