---
layout: post-light-feature
title: The Anxiety of Stagnation
description: "The only real way to find the right line is by sitting back in our figurative climbing harnesses, taking a good long look at the rock wall of life before us and allowing the best solution to present itself. "
categories: articles
date: 2015-01-23
image: 
        feature: pct.jpg
        thumb: pctthumb.png
published: true

---

Any time we close off a chapter in our lives after, say, graduating from school or transitioning out of a particular industry, we are left with a bit of an identity crisis. The entire time that we worked at Company X or attended University Y, it was pretty easy to sum up our lives in a few quick sentences and feel pretty good about it. At parties we got to spout off respectable one-liners that allowd other people to confirm that we were in some way involved in society or at least working towards a contribution. However, the moment we graduate or move on from that impressive-sounding occupation, suddenly we’re just mortals, like everyone else, floating around in the societal soup with no impressive quip about what we’re doing with our lives. This state of having no identity and no affiliation with a brand name school or company is so scary, in fact, that we tend to leap at the very next opportunity that enters our line of sight without really considering if it’s right for us. 

To use my own climbing experience as an analogy, when I went toproping for the first time a couple of years ago, I was terrified of heights. The mere idea of falling off the rock and sitting in my harness after being caught was enough to keep me awake the entire night before the trip. When I finally got out there, my fear propagated into my movement on the wall, causing me to flail at whatever holds were in view without thinking. Instead of gripping the holds at a calculated angle and using exactly enough strength to hold on, I would slap my hand on the rock at thoughtless angles and immediately get pumped squeezing the life out of the sweaty granite. I was just so scared of falling and trusted the rope so little that my actions and decisions didn't really reflect what I probably would have done if I'd trusted the rope, sat back and had a little think about what I felt I should do. 

Just like in climbing, there have been instances along the path of life when I was terribly afraid that there would be no rope to catch me if I failed to move on to the very next opportunity that presented itself. There seems to be a general idea in our culture that we should always be moving forward, always looking toward the next goal, without really considering whether that goal is right for us. We’re raised to think highly of the act of picking some goal that we might think is cool on some superficial level and working our asses off trying to achieve it. After achieving one goal or closing off one chapter of our lives, the immediate next question is always “OK, now what’s the next step?” But life doesn’t always line up so neatly. In fact, it’s pretty likely that at the end of any given life chapter, we're not able to truly see what the best-fitting next step should really be. 

To return to the climbing analogy, I’ve now been climbing for a few years and I’m fully comfortable with falling on the rope. In fact, becoming comfortable with sitting in my harness, getting the pump out of my arms and figuring out that perfect beta or the cleanest line has been a huge turning point in my sport climbing abilities. Being able to control fear and anxiety while hangdogging it on the rope and trying to figure out the beta is extremely important aspect of a climber’s tool belt. 

Similarly, it is extremely important that we practice and exercise our ability to take a moment to sit in our figurative life harness and wait for the correct line to present itself to us. I think many of us, myself included, struggle with the idea of actually halting forward progress in order to figure out how things should really play out. It may be that, after months of pondering, our initial thinking was correct all along and that the step we thought we should’ve taken is indeed the correct step. In this case, the time spent pondering will give us even more confidence that our first choice was the correct one. On the other hand, as I find is often the case in my life, our mindsets change when we step back out of the rush of life for a while. New opportunities, which we didn’t see before, tend to present themselves quite naturally, and we find that big problems or decisions in life really do have a way of working themselves out without any forcing on our part. 

In short, I think many of us are guilty of leaping too hastily at new opportunities out of fear of what will occur if we stagnate. But in fact, the only real way to find the best line through life is not by forcing what we think is best, but by sitting back in our figurative climbing harnesses, taking a good long look at the rock of life before us and allowing the best solution to present itself instead. 

*[Photo](https://www.flickr.com/photos/nordique/6146254254/in/photolist-an8afW-bEtFHB-ir7V65-otvqMj-pQB8RN-af9zvR-aeUBEL-5gJMTq-9Bmy1e-9Bmy96-a999U2-a9984r-6QNsyL-a99cXZ-a9bX4m-a9bYmA-aeRPmM-6QNt57-9QBEKG-6QNsH1-fwuqJe-39Pg3k-39PgJp-39TPkw-oJHEuA-aeUDbb-aeUCbm-aeUCD7-8e4MHi-8e4UXe-8e4PPe-8e8fUu-8e8eFY-8e8dgS-qsLe1V-39TMT9-39Pgun-39TNJq-6QNrp3-39TNYG-6QNtyY-71vKp3-5gJN7S-6QNrNs-6QJq32-6QJp1P-6QJpQT-5gJNnG-5gEt28-6QNtmf) by [Peter Stevens](https://www.flickr.com/photos/nordique/) / [CC BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/)*
